looking at the national stats we have uh
the number of people dying in British
Columbia today on a daily basis waiting
for diagnostic services of surgery is
comparable to the number of people who
are dying from the opioid crisis and
nobody's talking about it yeah and it's
crazy like this is I find that
completely unaccepted say that again the
number of people who are dying wait on a
waiting list for diagnostic services and
surgery in British Columbia is
comparable to the number of people who
are dying uh of Overdose deaths in
British Columbia because of the opioid
crisis right
[Music]
right hello everybody I have the
privilege today of speaking with John
rustad he's a conservative MLA member of
the legislative assembly in a province
called British Columbia and Canada very
resource Rich Province and one that's on
the coast uh that it holds a crucial
position with regards to the
transportation of Canadian resources all
around the world so he's a member of the
legislative assembly the provincial
government in a writing called a
constituency called naako Lakes but he's
also the leader of the conservative
party in British Columbia now British
Columbia is an interesting Province
because it it has a pretty pronounced
Left Right dichotomy in its political
history and the left wiers in the guise
of the new Democratic party have had had
control over British Columbia for the
last s years and uh that hasn't been
good to put it bluntly for all the
reasons that are associated with
everything that's transpiring everywhere
in the West on the culture War front so
uh now we talked about John's past he's
an interesting candidate because he has
a history he's an entrepreneur he's
started his own business which was very
successful then he transitioned into the
political domain serving as a member of
the legislative assembly and also as a
Cabinet member and so he's the rare
politician who has the administrative
managerial entrepreneurial and political
background to actually be a credible
leader he thinks he's got enough people
around him that are competent to put
together an Effective Government and so
that could all happen and so we talked
about well we talked about the culture
wars we talked about the forestry and
energy and uh other resource situation
in British Columbia we talked about the
state of relations with the indigenous
people and he was very ex successful
as the minister of Aboriginal relations
and Reconciliation in dealing with the
First Nation so that's also a big deal
in British Columbia in particular and so
and we talk more broadly about the
culture war in general that's you know
tearing the West apart as most of you
watching and listening no this election
in British Columbia it's another crucial
election as is the federal election in
Canada a year from from this October so
we're hoping we're hoping that the
province flips and I had a good chance
to to talk to John today about his
vision and to assess his competence
which is something you'll be able to do
as a consequence of watching this video
well Mr usad thank you very much for
joining me here in Fairview Alberta live
from Fairview Alberta um well it'll be
pre-recorded actually but it's live at
the moment um there's an election coming
up in British Columbia so I guess we
should start probably because we'll also
have an international audience maybe you
could start by just describing British
Columbia and letting every know where it
is and then we'll focus in on this
election well British Columbia of course
is on the west coast of Canada sometimes
referred to as the Left Coast
politically um but obviously it's a it's
a major port it's a major uh Gateway for
all of Canada to be able to access the
world many Goods actually moov from Asia
through British Columbia and down into
the United States uh it's a province
that is very rich with resources it's
got a tremendous amount uh to be able to
offer uh including everything from oil
and gas to to mining uh forestry it's
got a very good high-tech sector uh it
is a uh it's a very interesting Province
actually but it's many people look at it
and think uh you know that unfortunately
it's hopelessly managed because of the
politics that it's being mired in for
many years yeah well in British Columbia
has already had always had a sort of
strange provincial political scene
because it would of all the provinces in
Canada it's the one that flips to the
most radical left and to the most
conservative it flips back and forth and
so that's very interesting and uh the
you you also brought up the issue of
resources and this is something that we
might want to delve into right off the
bat I mean it tends to be a left-wing
Trope that the poor should be well
served and also that the environment
should be well served the problem is or
a problem is is that those two um
desires now run into conflict with one
another and my sense is that the left
the radical left is pretty willing to
sacrifice the poor to the planet
ineffectively too because this has
happened in Germany where the greens
have taken control and Germany is
deindustrializing and Germany actually
pollutes more per kilowatt of energy
produced now under the green regimes
than it did before under more like more
pure capitalism the point I'm making
here this is relevant for the
international audience that might be
watching this is that British Columbia
is very resourcer and as you pointed out
it's a very important port and Canada
has a lot of lowcost raw materials
especially on the energy side but not
only on the energy side that could be
brought to people all around the world
to alleviate their poverty and it's very
counterproductive to make it more
difficult for people to live not least
because they don't take a long-term view
of the future then and aren't likely to
be concerned in their own localities
with environmental issues so my sense is
British Columbia and Canada could do a
great job especially on the energy side
of
getting natural gas in particular off to
markets all around the world and British
Columbia controls that in large in a
large degree you're absolutely right I
mean uh I think it was over the last I
don't know how many decades you know 2.4
billion people have been lifted out of
object poverty because of affordable
energy and obviously you know Canada has
a tremendous amount of energy uh British
Columbia has a tremendous amount of gas
there's a billion people in the world to
that do not have electricity I think
it's somewhere between 400 and 600
million people that only have enough
electricity to run a refrigerator I mean
and those countries want to be able to
have a quality of life we have the
resources and the ability to be able to
take the resources we have and Export
them and use that for the benefit of our
own people to be able to improve our
quality of life but at the same time you
know be a real Global player in terms of
helping these other countries and so
it's it's something that has always
puzzled me in terms of why the left does
not want to do this
you know do they not care about the
people in the in other parts of the
world do they not care about the quality
of life of the people in our own
Province uh by taking advantage of these
Resources by providing that Revenue to
us and providing those resources to
other countries um we're not only
improving our quality of life but we are
playing our part in the globe making
sure that other people have that quality
of life and as and as you know as people
have more energy as people have uh that
higher quality life they care more about
the environment actually do more for the
environment than they can otherwise and
so you know we can play a big role in
that but like I say it's just our
policies seem to be blocking us from
being able to be a major player well and
the the Chinese are building Coal Fired
plants like mad and Canada has plenty of
coal but we also have plenty of liquid
natural gas which is a good replacement
for coal I mean it looks to me like
countries that are
industrializing and they're doing that
because they want to live longer more
productive and more opportunity Rich
lives just like we did they they go
through a relatively predictable
sequence in terms of energy development
and perhaps it starts with wood and Pete
and that sort of thing biomass which is
very polluting and not very efficient
and hard on the forests and terrible for
indoor pollution and they transition to
Coal which is much better in all regards
than ordinary biomass and then let's say
to natural gas and oil and then
potentially if we were also weren't
completely stupid about that to
something approximating nuclear and so
the the the succession of improvement on
the efficiency and cost front in the
energy world seems clear and it is a
mystery that that isn't an accepted
principle on the left because and it's
really shocked me because one of the
things I've seen over the last 10 years
is the every single time I've watched
this in every Western Country when the
left has the choice between worshiping
at the feet of the environment and an
stunningly counterproductive manner or
serving the poor they always serve the
environment and my sense is that that's
a consequence of likely an anti-human
and malthusian Ethos that emerged in the
1960s with claims by Paul Erick and
others biologists mostly that the world
was by necessity a place of finite
resources that we would be running short
of everything by the year 2000 that the
planet can't support more than a couple
of hundred million people at anything
approximating the standard of living we
have in the west and that and that that
anti-human ethos seems to have dominated
the thinking of the left much to the
terror and hardship of the poor I've
been following this guy online named
Jasper manugo and he's an African and a
subsistence farmer but he's quite
literate when it comes to the use of
social media and he posts
continually showing how much work he and
his family have to do to scratch out a
living without fossil fuels trying to
subsistence farm and to show that that's
not the Romantic dream of what would you
say noble savage living that seems to
possess the idiot rans of the left but
but a terrible hardship for him and
everyone around him and he is trying to
bring to public attention the fact that
the world desperately needs well not
least the fossil fuels that Canada could
provide and Alberta wants to do that
obviously Alberta is the most for
everybody listening who who don't know
Alberta is a very fossil fuel Rich
Province but it's landlocked it's right
next to British Columbia and Canada's
had a hell of a time getting its act
together with regards to the export of
well natural gas in particular yeah I
know there's no question in my mind um
you know those those natural resources
those hydrocarbons could do a lot to
lift up the uh people in many places
around the world but but more
importantly than that you know you
mentioned farming in Africa and that
side of things there seems to this this
Bent by populations around the world
governments around the world that they
want to stop the use of nitrogen based
fertilizer for nitrogen based fertilizer
I'm sure you know Norman borag I think
his name was who received the Nobel
Prize for his work what was called the
Green Revolution right the massive
increase uh in agriculture productivity
because of nitrogen-based fertilizer
artificial fertilizers as well as water
management and and better Land
Management and I I just think of it and
now we want to go backwards I mean 40%
of the world's food supply comes from
using nitrogen-based fertilizer so if
you're going to stop using that and of
course you need hydrocarbons for that
you need a you know natural gas for the
feed stock um you're talking about
significant amount of shortage of food
people which has already happened and
I'm sorry I'm not up for that I mean
that is not the way we should be as a
world right we should actually be trying
to do everything we can to improve the
lives and to be able to provide those
goods and I just look at British
Columbia as well and from an agriculture
perspective
we only procure 34% of the food we
consume from BC 2third of the food that
we need comes from outside our borders
now we produce lots of lots of cows you
know Cals and send them off for
finishing we produce lots of wine and
these types of things for export but the
basics we're not meeting the needs of
our own population and so if you've got
these governments around the world that
are talking about reducing food
production it leaves our population
vulnerable and so this was actually the
reason I was kicked out of my former
political party because I started
looking at the saying wait a second this
is not right we as a government should
be putting the priority of looking after
our own people making sure that we meet
their basic needs and similarly you know
we should take apart a role you know
nationally internationally making sure
that other people can look after
themselves as well it's just the right
thing to do and yet you're right the
left seems to be hellbent on uh you know
this ideology that probably yeah like I
say probably rooted out of the 60s that
just seems to be carrying forward it's
it's the the most humanitarian policy
Poss possible policies possible it seems
to me it's pretty straightforward it's
cheap energy and cheap food if you have
cheap energy and cheap food you don't
have poor people and so and then the
additional benefit as we already pointed
out is that as soon as people aren't
scrabbling around in the muck for their
next meal they can start to take
something approximating
multigenerational perspective and that
is what people do I mean part of the
reason that we live so long is because
as Grandparents we also help care for
children like human beings are wired to
take a longer view if they can but if
you're if you're desperately poor you
default to what is necessary right now
and that's often agricultural practices
and so forth that aren't sustainable
over the long run and so you know I
figured this out about 15 years ago that
we could all have our cake and eat it
too if we used our energy resources
wisely if we knocked energy costs down
which should be a primary goal of
politicians at every level of analysis
regardless of political party if we
knocked our energy cost down we could we
could eradicate poverty worldwide and we
could feed everybody and then everybody
would start taking care of their
environment locally which seems like an
optimal it's very well it borders on the
alternative policies in my estimation
border are genocidal and I know already
that the fact that energy costs have
spiraled upwards is putting tremendous
mortal pressure
on the poorest people all around the
world you can see too in Canada grocery
prices have gone up so much that it's
it's actually it's actually hard to
believe it's 22 or 23% that they've gone
up just in the last couple of years uh
and you look at it and but you're right
about energy as well and you look you
look at what's going on in the world and
you think okay so we're driving up their
energy prices and I think it was the
can't remember which country it was the
the president of the country in Africa
said look no no country's ever been able
to develop and and be able to meet it
its needs by going with wind and solar
they've had to use more dense energy
such as coal and then natural gas and
then obviously we need to get to nuclear
and I'll talk about nuclear in a minute
because that's a very interesting
situation for BC okay okay but when I
look at that there's a clear correlation
between affordable energy and quality of
life and in British Columbia right now
because of the carbon tax and prices
going up and we've got the highest gas
prices in the country people are
struggling I mean there's a third of
British Colombians at looking looking at
leaving The Province one and two youth
are looking at leaving the province
because they can't they can't make a go
of it in a province that is so rich
that's got so much to offer and yet this
is what has happened from poor
government policies driving up the cost
of the basics food energy housing and
they're saying wait a second here I
can't ever hope to buy a home I can't
raise a family why why would I stay here
I'm going to go find another place to be
able to build my life I mean that's and
that's what British Columbia actually
was founded on was people from other
parts of the world that had those
problems and said let's go to British
Columbia because I can build a life
there and it's now flipped and so this
is what needs to change and it's and
fundamentally it has to change at the
political level in order for it to be
able to change throughout
Society since I joined forces with the
daily wire plus 2 years ago we've built
a comprehensive collection of Premium
content we've developed these shows not
only to provide you with a structure and
framework for meaning but to arm you
against the sadistic troll demons my
collection which we've titled mastering
life with Jordan B Peterson acts as a
guide to help you win at the series of
games that make up life my series
marriage was designed to help you
strengthen your relationship so that you
can create the perfect date that repeats
endlessly in the series on masculinity
Dragons monsters and men I outlin the
way of discovering your purpose of
slaying the dragons that stand in your
path Envision and Destiny that will help
you transform the chaotic potential of
the future into the actuality that you
need and desire this fall we're adding
even more exclusive content to my
mastering life series my new series
negotiation offers a practical guideline
to help you close a deal where both
sides walk away with a win we're also
offering a three-part series on success
strengthen your family and to strengthen
your relationships and to aim up you
don't want to deteriorate into an
idiotic Hedonism two of the top things
people are struggling with are
depression and anxiety might we walk
through that at the Practical level and
then right down to the neuroscientific
level in my five-part series depression
and anxiety in addition to our mastering
life series we've explored biblical
writings and their cultural influence
including a deep evaluation of the books
of Genesis and exodus and how the
biblical Corpus the biblical Library
itself came into existence our new
10-part series on the gospels delineates
the accounts of the New Testament
writings and finally joined me on a
journey through time to find out where
we came from and and how that formed who
we are and what we believe foundations
of the West the first episode is out now
on dailywire plus Rome Jerusalem Athens
five-part series I had a blast making it
and I hope you find it extremely useful
to watch for those of you who have
already subscribed thank you very much
stay tuned we're releasing new content
now every week through the end of the
year for those of you who have yet to
sign up use promo code Jordan and save
35% on your annual membership it's a
hell of a deal visit dailywire.com to
get the entire collection of mastering
life plus all the new releases that are
to come the work I'm doing in
conjunction with the daily wire brings
the spirit of Adventure forward join us
on dailywire plus today onward and
[Music]
upward well and we could we could
examine wind and solar for a moment too
because I like I've got nothing
personally against wind or solar
although I think that the windmills are
hideous and they devastate the
Landscapes that they're placed in and
that actually matters because well the
one of the environment our
environmentalist contentions is that the
beauty of nature is a value in and of
itself as well as something that's of
obvious benefit to human beings and
windmill littered Landscapes are by no
means beautiful and I actually think
that that's a problem because ugly
matters but there's there's issues that
are much more relevant than that it's
like solar panels don't last very long
they're very susceptible to hail storms
for example they're very energy
demanding in their production um they're
often uh manufactured in China and often
using slave labor which doesn't strike
me as a particularly positive benefit
they tend to work very badly at night
and wind power of course both wind and
solar
costs spiral up towards the infinite as
the supply decreases right so there's no
solar at night and my understanding of
what that means is that even if we had a
wind and solar grid which we don't that
was reliable and that plentiful which we
certainly don't and are nowhere near
doing we need a backup system anyways
like and this is what's happened in
Germany and they took their bloody
nuclear plants offline and then they
defaulted to coal and then they burn
lignite which is the most polluting form
of coal and now in Germany they have
much less electricity it's much more
unstable they're much more dependent on
foreign tyrants for their energy and
they pollute more well they're in
deindustrializing exactly and and
they've also driven up the cost of the
energy yeah five times what it should be
the quality of life for the people in
Germany is in Decline and it's a
straight correlation high energy costs
lower quality of life yeah and so I you
know I look wind and solar has their
place but they're additives to our
Energy Mix they are not base load they
can't be base load not to mention as as
I said you really where you get the
value in energy where you can drive down
the cost is the higher density energy
describe that for people because people
don't understand what that means well
you think about you think about you know
wood for example right it's it's not
very dense has lots of energy in it but
it's not very dense so the huge
advancement was going to Coal because it
was a far smaller amount of product to
produce the same amount of energy then
you get to oil and natural gas which is
similar once again you're using less
product to get the same amount of energy
and the real genie the the what the best
we have so far is when you look at
nuclear when you look at uranium the
amount of energy you con generate out of
uranium is is phenomenally better from a
amount of material you need as opposed
to the other products and you know in
British Columbia it's interesting you
think the left doesn't support you know
nuclear power that's so which is crazy
so insane but in British Columbia it was
actually a center right party that
actually banned nuclear power from being
used in BC which is weird and but it's
and it was because of politics it's too
many politicians today they chase you
know where they think the vote is as
opposed to standing on the principles
standing on the values that are needed
to be able to create a you know a good
society and quality of life and so that
to me is is where you know politics
needs to go and often that's not
necessarily politics of the right or the
left it's just you know politics that is
willing to actually stand up and say no
these are the values that we stand for
this is what we're going to go and say
that we need to do for our society and
then ask people to support that make the
case as opposed to trying to you know
Pander to to the various political
positioning so okay so back to the
nuclear issue so it is the case case
that the radicals on the left oppose
nuclear although as you pointed out the
conservative types and the and the more
classic liberals can also get entirely
confused about this in a kind of stupid
populist manner but let's let's lay lay
a few things out here so well as you
pointed out nuclear energy is very
energy dense and that means you get more
energy per unit of matter okay why is
that relevant well it decreases
Transportation costs for example and
that also reduces environmental load and
so it's much more effective to ship coal
than wood and it's much more efficient
to ship natural gas than coal right so
and that also has its environmental
benefit okay and then you might say on
the downside on the nuclear side you
know people are afraid of nuclear
radiation and they're afraid of what to
do with the nuclear waste but nuclear
power has historically been very safe um
more people die from solar power every
year than from nuclear power and the
fundamental reason for that is because
they fall off roofs when they're
installing the the panels I mean life's
complicated right it's not something
that you'd predict but yeah no you're
absolutely right but I I look at it this
way so as a province in British Columbia
they've got this this green agenda and
um and what they want to do is they want
to go to using heat pumps instead of
using natural gas and so you look at it
and think okay well that sounds good why
wouldn't you do that know heat pumps
other than the fact that they're very
ineffective when it's cold which is a
real problem in Canada V majority of
British Columbia right in the winter
however U when you look at it and say if
every house in British Columbia would
required a heat pump and every business
in you know in British company required
a heat pump we would need to build the
equivalent of six or seven more sight
sea dams right and we're not going to
likely build another major Dam and BC so
where's that power going to come from
we're already net importers of
electricity into British Columbia I mean
we've got these vast amounts of of
hydroelectric power you know our grid is
is almost all green if if you consider
Hydro uh Power green
um but it's we don't have enough and so
and they want to put these restrictions
on saying we need to use more of it but
there's no plan to build it out and this
is where we actually have to start
having that conversation about nuclear
whether it's small modu reactors or
other types of nuclear technology we're
going to need that power in British
Columbia and so it's something that I
think as a government we need to go out
and have an honest conversation with
people about like let's talk about what
it means and what the cost is for for
people and what that means for your
quality of life and what the options are
and let's just be straight up with
people and let them decide where they
would like to go so so let's we'll we'll
we'll delve in one more way into the
nuclear issue so the fundamental shth of
the left with regards to the environment
is carbon dioxide production now
personally and I'm not going to push you
on this to any degree but personally I'm
very skeptical of the climate change
science science uh science is a
complicated business and what the media
reports is not necessarily science I've
been struck to the core I would say by
the NASA reported findings that the
planet has greened 20% since the year
2000 and that one consequence of that is
that crops are much more productive like
13 to 15% more productive and that is
directly because of carbon dioxide
increase and so I truly believe that a
dispassionate scientist who wasn't being
affected by The Hangover of the
anti-human malthusian agenda from the
1960s would look at the data and say
well the planet's 20% Greener and most
of that Greening occurred in semiarid
areas so the deserts are actually
shrinking how the hell is that not a net
good from the environmental side
independent of that if you do believe
that carbon dioxide is the villain and
you believe that indeep independently of
your anti-human malthusian anti-
industrialization what Drive there's too
many people on the planet well then you
do everything you could to reduce carbon
dioxide okay and if you're not going to
impoverish and starve
people then you're going to use nuclear
but the left opposes Nuclear So how what
can you do but conclude that there's
something other than even an anti-carbon
dioxide agenda that's driving that that
system of ideas it has to be something
like an anti- capitalist anti-
industrialization anti-human population
agenda because nothing else accounts for
the left's opposition to nuclear power
you know I I always I always like to
joke and I mean this is it's a sad
reality but how is it that we've
convinced carbon-based beings that
carbon is a problem yeah well the carbon
based beings are the problem well
certainly the thinking I don't
necessarily mean the carbon based beings
are a problem but no I meant that in
terms of how the left is conceptualizing
this but I I I look at it from a
perspective in British Columbia like
this is why we want to get rid of the
carbon tax I mean taxing people into
poverty in some vain attempt to change
the weather is absolute lunacy it makes
no sense whatsoever so that sort of
stuff has got to go not to mention it
drives up your energy cost which means
you're lowering your quality of life and
you're you're costing people you know
their ability to be able put food on the
table and pay their rent doesn't make
any sense to be doing this and uh so
that's not an approach that we're going
to be worried about in British Columbia
should the conservatives have a chance
to to win a government um and it's just
because it's it we can't make a
difference even if you think CO2 is the
problem many people you know still
believe that we can't make a difference
one way or the other anyway even if we
stopped everything we did we're a
fraction of of a percentage point we're
not we're rounding ER everything the
West does with regards to the green
agenda on atmospheric grounds is
rendered 100% irrelevant by China and
India and the leftists say well we can
be an example it's like I don't think
we're posing much of an example to the
Chinese How many coal plants have they
built in the last two years it's like
600 it's some ridiculous to me I also
look at and think okay who we we're a
small trading jurisdiction British
columbas and Canada to to a degree is as
well we depend very much on exporting
our Goods so if we're driving up the
cost of our Goods you know the simple
supply and demand if you want to buy an
apple and I've got an Apple for sale for
$3 and somebody else has an Apple for
sale for $2 you're going to go get the
Apple for $2 right I mean that's you're
going to stretch your dollars as much as
you can and so if we're driving up the
cost of our Goods through carbon taxes
and and other policies in British
Columbia we can't compete on a global
scale and so we actually lose our market
share we actually create more problems
in our society we actually once again
drive down our quality of life our GDP
growth you know starts shrinking which
it is which it is right I mean as you
know right I mean it's a horrendous uh
record in British Columbia and in Canada
yeah well Canadians now we have 60% of
the GDP per capita that Americans have
60% like we're we're entering an era
where we we are where the American
typical American is twice as rich as the
typical can Canadian it's insane and
that doesn't factor in the fact that our
housing costs are in Canada where we
have quite a lot of land our housing
costs are generally twice what they are
in the US so we're half as wealthy
approximately and our real estate is
twice as expensive and for what and then
the other environmental conundrum that
perplexes me about Canada is like okay
well people around the world are going
to get their energy somewhere as we can
see by the fact that China is building
Coal Fired plants at a rate that swamps
anything possible as is India as is
India and of course they are and of
course Africa will do the same thing if
if the international neoc colonialists
don't stop them by refusing to lend the
money and so forth which they are so the
developing world is going to develop and
we have absolutely no right whatsoever
to put anything approximating a halt on
that because that really means that
we're killing the world's poor people
and depriving their children of any
opportunity we have no more moral right
to do that whatsoever okay so then you
might say well Canada should be an
example and we could set an example for
Green Technology that the rest of the
world could adopt I mean first of all no
I don't think we can do that because
we're not Innovative enough to do that
it's also very difficult but also the
best rejoinder to that is well do you
want Europeans the Japanese do you want
them dependent on the dictatorships that
control the oil supply or Putin and do
do you want them dependent for their
energy on jurisdictions that unlike
Canada are much more lacks in their
environmental regulations I mean one
thing you can say about the Canadian
fossil fuel industry is that it's
arguably the most attentive in the world
to environmental considerations now that
doesn't make it perfect but nothing's
perfect so again I don't understand the
objection it's like why can't Canada
play its proper role as provider of raw
resources to the world I have a theory
around that and and I mean certainly
there's a lot of the left thinking
that's in there but I actually think
quite frankly we're also being
influenced by other countries agendas I
mean obviously look if if Canada is
exporting its energy to around the world
then we're not selling cheap energy to
the United States and so there's a there
is a a very specific agenda you think
about it we sell our oil um down to the
United States at a you know $20 a barrel
discount 15 to 20 you know sometimes
more sometimes less but what do they do
they take that oil find it and ship it
out to the east coast and so they make
money on the Arbitrage on
so this doesn't make sense to me and
it's actually one of the reasons why I
think you know it should we have that
opportunity form government I actually
want to try to create a Canada wide Free
Trade Agreement it makes no sense to me
that I could trade easier with the
United States and Mexico than I can with
other provinces we have no sense of who
we are as a country we need to be able
to create that sense as a country so
let's start talking about how we
actually build trade across this country
and have a sense of who we are yeah well
RPM famously announced that we really
have no national identity in Canada
right so as you and I think that's more
what would you say a an indication of
his sense of what constitutes Canada his
belief that seems to be quite prevalent
in the west is that there's no uniting
ethos that defines us as a country and I
mean it's a it's a Preposterous notion
and it's unbelievably destructive you I
think about it so 160 years ago we had
the thinking that brought this country
together right the rail line tied in the
country we had the sense of who we were
you know based on our identity if if we
were to take the 10 provinces and the
three territories today and say let's
build this entity called Canada what
would we have to do to achieve that
right well obviously you know trade
would be a big part of it but we'd also
have to have a conversation about you
know where the authorities and powers
are because there's obviously some
overlaps and problems we have today but
we'd have to you know have that sense of
what is it that would bind us what is it
that would keep us together what is it
that would benefit us what's the benefit
for Atlantic Canada and western Canada
and central Canada to come together
and this is a conversation we should
actually not be afraid to have as
Canadians because this is the best
country in the world I mean you've done
a lot of traveling I've done a little
bit of traveling I've seen places all
around the world this is the best place
in the world we have everything we could
ever want in this in this country we
have all the opportunity and potential
we ever want I mean we're hopelessly
managed at all levels in government but
you know this is why I look at it and
think I don't want to tear this country
apart let's figure out how we actually
strength this country because it can be
such a great place it can be the the
promise quite frankly that it used to be
many many decades ago we have still have
all the the building blocks to be able
to do that well part of the reason I
wanted to talk to you because the the
podcast has a relatively International
audience and so it's always hard to tell
when drawing attention to something
that's somewhat more local is useful and
interesting to that broader audience
although it is also quite peculiar and
noteworthy that Canadian politics have
become of Interest International
interest in the last 10 years that's a
real change and there are real reasons
for that and I think that what's
happening in Alberta and in British
Columbia are particularly emblematic of
why Canada has has become centered in
the international Spotlight and it's
because those are the provinces where
the war between the free market people
who believe in private property and the
kind of free trade that allows people to
make choices and genuinely lifts them
out of poverty which we know beyond a
shadow of a doubt especially after the
collapse of the Cold War uh the collapse
of the Soviet Union in the 1980s and the
fact that most most countries regardless
of how ideologically warped they are
started getting a lot richer when they
weren't outright Communists you really
see this battle playing out in Canada in
Alberta and in British Columbia the
battle between the utopian environment
worshippers of the left and their
de-industrialization strategy and people
who believe more in an English common
law tradition private property and the
free exchange of goods and services
Freedom in a word productive freedom and
and so let let's delve into the
situation in British Columbia now in
British Columbia the Socialists the new
Democratic party in Canada have been in
power how long have they been in power
now been in power seven years seven
years okay and so in your estimation
what is the consequence of that well uh
when you look at it I mean our quality
of life has declined we've lost almost
2third of our forest sector um you know
people aren't investing mining nobody
wants to invest this province I think it
was something like 70,000 people left
the province last year a third of
British Colombians were looking at
leaving people can't buy a house um
there is a this huge problem with with
drugs and addiction with their safe
Supply and decriminalization approach
that they've taken which has just
devastated lives and families and
communities and in addition to that um
you know the efforts they're doing with
with indigenous populations First
Nations is actually a direct assault now
on private property rights it's really
quite something to see how this is
changing in the province and people are
waking up and looking thinking wait a
second what's really going on here and I
think that's attributes a lot to why the
conservative party in British Columbia
has risen so rapidly I mean it's it's a
party that's the oldest party in BC's
history it was first founded in 1903 but
it hasn't formed a government since 1927
it hasn't elected anybody since the
1970s so this is a party that's been in
the wilderness but because we're coming
with a very different approach talking
about this there is a huge appetite for
change to move away from these
ideologically driven governments that we
have had into something that's more
focused you know on just the average
everyday person so okay a couple of
issues there so there is this phenomenon
known as the natural resource curse so
economists have studied economies all
around the world and concluded that
polities that are rich in so-called
natural resources are not more likely
than other countries to be wealthy and
this is a very important finding because
another accepted truism on the left is
that wealth is a consequence let's say
of Natural Resources I don't really
believe in the concept of natural
resource at all Air maybe is a natural
resource other than that fresh water
fresh water is not a bloody natural
resource it takes a lot of work to
provide a city with natural with fresh
water and many people around the world
don't have fresh water and certainly uh
fossil fuels and so forth are by no
means natural resources because you have
to discover them and you have to pump
them and you have to refine them and you
have to ship them and then you I might
ask yourself well what is all that
activity dependent on and my sense is
that activity is dependent on while a
complex social environment and one
that's predicated on private property
and diligent work and trust and so the
only real natural resource is one of
trust and then the question becomes how
do you set up the kind of high trust
society that enables people to utilize
what's right in front of them
productively and this is the war that's
going on in British Colombia now you
said that two-thirds of the forest
sector for example in British Columbia
this reminds me I just did a podcast on
Venezuela right 70% of what there's been
a 70% decrease in GDP in Venezuela and
onethird of the population one quarter
of the population actually moved out of
Venezuela like vanished completely right
and so that's a more extensive form of
Socialism but you're seeing something
that's the Canadian equivalent in
British Columbia 2third of the forest
sector what's happened to the forest
sector well what's happened is you've
had successive policies that have been
brought in by the NDP that have driven
up our costs so that we are now
certainly by a long shot the highest
cost producers um access to the fiber
has been severely restricted because of
these policies that have been put in
place and so you've got a combination of
not being able to access the wood you
need to run a facility and the cost is
so high that you can't make a go of it
and so compan are just saying I we're
out of here we just we're closing our
doors we're leaving and uh and it's just
it's it's wrong we have I mean Forest
Products is the most sustainable it's
the most environmentally friendly
product we can be producing we as a
province in British Columbia have a
tremendous land mass and a tremendous
resource of of of forest opportunity but
it's because of these ideologies and
these these cost- driven factors it's
you've got a government quite frankly
that's more focused on the environmental
movement than they are on families and
workers and communities and actually
providing these products that the world
needs I'm taking four of my esteemed
colleagues and you across the world oh
wow this is amazing to ReDiscover the
ways our ancient ancestors developed the
ideas that shape modern society it was a
monument to Civic greatness visit the
places where history was made that is
ash from the actual fires when the
Babylonians burn Jerusalem from
2500 years ago to walk the same roads We
are following the path of the
crucifixion and experience the same
[Music]
w we are on the site of a
miracle what kind of resources can human
beings bring to a mysterious but
knowable
Universe science art politics all that
makes life wonderful
[Music]
and something new about the world is
revealed well and it's it's the as we
pointed out previously too it's a false
environmentalism because forests can be
managed properly and that can also
reduce their fire risk for example if
it's done well and that it hasn't been
done well at all and there's High fire
risk that's blamed on climate change but
it's much more appropriate and
responsible to blame it on management
and so and you said a third of British
Colombians are thinking about leaving
and that's absolutely staggering because
all the opportunity for British Columbia
to be as rich as Norway I would say is
it's right there in front of people if
they're willing to take it exactly and
that's and that is you know where when
you got a government that is running
massive deficits that's that's boring
from the future that has you know
believes and everything should be run by
the public service that's you know has
no problem trampling freedoms and no
problem Ling you know de
Democratic process you know and and you
have a cost structure that is going up
and a quality life that's dropping
because you've got low GDP and people
are are saying okay we're out of here
and this is this is a huge thing but you
know property rights is in in my opinion
is is a fundamental core for freedoms in
a in a society if your property rights
are at risk um you know that really
underlines or undermines just the core
values that you have in a society and
we're seeing right now for example there
are many proper
um along the ocean front in certain
areas that um were sold based on having
water access that's how you got access
to your property and now the
government's coming along and taking
away that water AIS we've got situation
for example in haiday where there has
been an agreement between the hi of
people and the government to address
title and title needs to be addressed
and it's part of our constitution but
what they've done is they've actually
identified title underneath private
property rights and so indigenous law
will now apply to private properties
indigenous law will now say what you can
and can't do the indigenous law is the
indigenous government yeah and then what
does that mean like I have a lot of
native friends and I just spent some
time on Vancouver Ireland and one of the
things that we discussed in detail was
banned corruption like there's no reason
to assume whatsoever that the indigenous
governments that were set up under what
what the Indian Act that that produced a
a well of counterproductive and poverty
inducing policies have anything to do
with indigenous Land Title and so that
that's another that's another what would
you say that's another nest of snakes
that Canadians won't touch because
they're afraid of being branded let's
say racist but well I I tell you so I
mean I I spent a lot of years as an
Minister associated with this file and
uh you know I signed 435 agreements with
First Nations we did a lot of what I
called economic reconciliation uh with
First Nations which is about getting
them engaged economically but what we're
seeing here now particularly in places
like Haku so so the property private
property rights now you're still going
to have the rights to your property but
you may not have the rights to be able
to do certain things in your property
depending on what the laws will be but
more importantly now with the Stine case
which was the first title case in Canada
which was the Stine people in the
Caribou in British Columbia um what that
said is that indigenous people have the
rights to benefit from Crown land or
from title land and so and where those
benefit are taken away by government or
government actions government needs to
provide an accommodation and so on hi
toay because of private property clearly
that would alienate that tital land take
away the indigenous right to be able to
benefit from that property and so
there's going to need to be a
compensation required and you think hiu
there's not that much it's 2% of the
property it's not that big a deal but
think of what comp compensation would be
for downtown Vancouver or downtown
Victoria or any of the other communities
in the province should title be found
underneath those areas
it's also going to drive racial tension
through exactly it's going to bankrupt
The Province and and these policies and
stuff is is might be fine government to
government but it's creating friction
from a people to people and to me that's
not reconciliation and so these are big
issues in British Columbia and that's
they've been just idly or or just
carelessly tossed around by our current
government okay let's turn a little bit
to to the conservative party uh more
specifically so as you said it's the you
said it was the oldest iCal party in
British Columbia but hasn't been in
power since the 1920s so when did you
let let's walk a little bit through your
political history let's walk a little
bit through your biography so sure so
tell us well tell tell us to begin with
about your political history let's start
at the beginning and walk us through
that look about how far back to go but
you know born and raised in Prince
George married um living just west of
Prince Geor what did your parents do so
my parents uh my dad was in forestry and
my mom um um was actually stay home mom
and to help raise the kids right I had
two older brothers uh through this and
so um my dad and my mom and stilled on
me um you know entrepreneurial nature
that's well so that all my life that was
sort of my goal and objective so as I
went through um you know I end up
starting my own company I had an office
in Houston BC an office in Prince George
and a dozen people and I was so upset
with where politics was going in BC from
the 90s when the NDP was in power again
I actually sat down with my wife and
saidwhat do you think about moving to
Calgary I can take my company and do the
same business for the resource sector in
Alberta as I was doing in British
Columbia and so I thought okay we this
out and ultimately we made the decision
to stay in Prince George and that left
me with two options either I just live
with it yeah or I get involved and try
to change it yeah and I'm not kind uh so
it was called Western geographic
information systems it was doing uh data
analysis U for the forest sector a lot
of things like Forest development plans
and Timber Supply analysis those types
of things so I decided like I say we
decided to stay and being that I'm not
the kind of person that just lives with
it I decided to get involved and change
it politics was never an ambition of M
was wasn't a goal or objective U so I
got involved in 90s yeah yeah and so in
in the early 2000s I got involved in
politics and then decided actually you
know I kind of enjoy this you know I
enjoy the fact that you can actually
create some policies and make a
difference and be able to help people
and so I was first elected provincially
I was a school trustee for three years
and then I was first elected
provincially in 2005
um reelected um you know ever since so
it been almost 20 years now in
provincial politics and I served a term
in um in the minister of aberage and
relations and Reconciliation I served a
very short time as Minister for Forest
lands and natural resource operations
and then uh and that was when that was
uh 2013 to 2017 so let me let me ask you
about your business again one of the
things that people who are listening
need to understand is that if you're
imbued with an entrepreneurial Spirit
which is actually rather rare right
people like to think that everybody's a
Creator everybody's creative and that
you know if you scratch deep enough into
everyone's Soul you'll find someone
who's entrepreneurial and that's not
true it's actually quite rare and it's
associated with a personality trait
known as openness to experience so
you're people tend to be temperamentally
entrepreneurial and they're more akin to
creative people in general now one of
the things about being a creative
entrepreneur is that if you're also
conscientious and dedicated to your
company's success and if you're not it's
you're not going to
succeed you'll more or less do
anything that's appropriate and
effective to make your company work
because you're not going to throw all
your resources into something like that
and take those sorts of risks with your
Capital with your time and then with
your employees without being bloody well
committed to its success and that does
mean you'll move right and so you see
this happening in the United States is
that the entrepreneurial types are
flooding out of California they're
flooding out of the more socialist
States because it's just too annoying
and uncertain and so and it's very
dangerous to get a flight like that
because it's a small number of people
small percentage of people who are
entrepreneurial and if you get rid of
them then you don't have anybody who
wants to run businesses so you said you
were tempted in the 90s to move but you
went into the political realm instead
and what tell me tell me how your party
affiliation has worked across the span
of your engagement in in the political
world so when I decided to go into
politics of course I'm not U disposed to
the ideology of the left um I've always
been more on the conservative side of
politics although I find it odd because
sometimes the federal conservatives
think I'm too liberal and the federal
liberals think I'm too conservative so
who knows what all that means but so I
was I looked for the party that most
aligned with where I was which was at
the time the BC Liberal Party the BC
Liberal Party was born um out of the old
social credit party when the social
credit party collapsed in 1991
and so I I joined that party and I was
like I said I was elected and served all
the way through up until 2022 with that
party and you served as a member of the
legislative assembly member of the
legislative assembly and um uh like I
say in a couple of cabinet positions as
well and in and uh in uh 2022 was a very
tough year uh for my family uh my father
passed in January my father-in-law
passed in February and my mother passed
in July or in um in July and so I was
talk with Kim about just leaving
politics I mean I don't need to be doing
this right and so we kind of had this
discussion and then Along came a paper
out of the federal government called the
farm or Farm emissions reduction
strategy yeah yeah right which which was
this reduction of the nitrogen based
fertilizer and stopping cows from
farting and belching because they think
somehow for some reason that's going to
change the weather right it's it's just
nonsense but it would have a very
negative impact on my writing and so I
tried within the party to have a
discussion about this the party I was
part of and and I kept getting shut down
shut down so then why why because the
leader of the party uh which is now the
the BC United party was saying we need
to be leaders in fighting climate change
we need to be up on the Forefront and
and that was his whole motto in terms of
what he wanted to do and he wasn't
willing to look at any evidence or have
any discussions about anything that
would have an impact on do you think
that was a vote getting strategy or Comm
of course it was it was all about votes
it was a you know political party that
was more about Chase trying to chase
where they thought they needed to be in
the political Spectrum as opposed to
having any values and so in December I
put out a uh or I mean in August I
should say I put out a um a retweet of a
Patrick Moore tweet which questioned
some of the role of CO2 and talked about
the Great Barrier Reef didn't think you
mean the thriving great berry Reef that
great B re the one that is you know
doing better than it ever has on record
at the moment um
so um I forgotten all about that I even
put this thing out there so on Wednesday
my phone lights up and I'm like you know
all these phone calls coming I was
taking the day off because the next day
was my birthday this was August 2022
August yes that was August 17th 2022 so
I I made arrangements to talk to the
leader on on August 18th which just
happened to be my birthday and I called
and I called him and he was angry I get
it you know nobody wants to be put off
when there's an issue you want to be
able to deal with it right away so I I
talked to him about it and I said well
this is what the problem was and this is
what I've been trying to do and and he
said look you have a choice you either
have to parir it our party position on
climate or you can't can't be part of a
caucus and I told him I said look I was
elected to represent my writing I was
elected to represent the people and
they're asking me and they they want a
voice that is going to be about helping
them not hurting them and he said I'm
sorry you know if that's the way you
feel that's fine he hung up on me and
half an hour later I was kicked out of
caucus and so that then created a a very
interesting problem for me because once
again I was back at the same place I was
in the year 2000 which was I'm not happy
with where things are going in the
province there's no chance of a
political change because the both
parties were basically fighting for the
same territory on the left side of the
spectrum right right and so what do I do
do I leave the province do I retire and
just leave the province or do I stay
involved and actually try to change it
and so my wife actually said to me no
you need to you need to work on this you
need to stay involved that you've got my
full support so I so I looked at it and
thought okay so I spent some time that
fall you know exploring some options and
ultimately uh looked at the conservative
party which was just a very you know
small party representing only about 3%
of the people in BC at the time and
thought you know what it's time to
resurrect it it's time to actually try
to do it so I joined that in February of
2023 and took on the leadership at the
end of uh March of 2023 and uh you know
we've gone from 3% in the polls to tide
with the NDP and some polls were
actually ahead of the NDP right now
going into the election okay there's a
few things I want to delve into there on
the more personal side the the first is
this is a terrible political conundrum
that people should be aware of and in my
experience there is an awful lot of
narcissistic exhibitionism in politics
and that's not a useful brush to Tar all
politicians with but it's something
worth focusing on so you see this in
entertainment you see it in the media
and you see it in politics and the
reason for that is that people who are
temperamentally narcissistic so they're
extroverted and disagreeable those are
the personality predictors and it's even
worse if they're unconscientious that's
you're starting to border on psychopathy
at that point that's not good cuz you
want to be the center of attention you
don't give a damn about other people
that's low agreeableness and you're
completely unreliable with regards to
your word those are that's a bad
combination there's a disproportionate
number of people like that in any domain
where there's a lot of public attention
Okay so it's it's going to happen on the
political front Okay so now how do you
get competent politicians well this is a
real problem because most competent
people are already doing something
especially if they're say 40 and above
they've got a career that's usually well
established that's quite productive or
if they happen to be overachievers
they've got quite a little Empire you
know I have some friends who are hyper
successful and I've talked to them about
entering the political Arena and their
comment often is I would be less
effective in the political role than I
am doing what I'm already doing because
they'd have to put all that on hold as
well and so what that means is that not
only are there a disproportionate number
of self-serving narcissists in the
political realm is that it's very
difficult to get people who are actually
competent playing the political game
because it's difficult it is very
difficult you have to have a very thick
hide too to withstand the slings and
arrows of your opponents and all the
lies that come at you like I don't think
I can tolerate that quite frankly I
don't think I have the Constitution for
it um in any case you have this option
because you had your own company which
you could expand more or less in
accordance with your competence but you
decided repeatedly to stay in the
political realm you also said your wife
supported you and that's that's also
very interesting because it would have
been easier in some ways for her to just
have you around and to have all that
stress out of your life so what is it
about the relationship you have with
your wife that has held you two together
in the political realm and why is she
supporting you given the personal costs
let's say that might be associated with
that well and I guess it goes back when
we were married uh which was in 1995
we've been married now uh you know 29
years coming up on 30 years uh shortly
after uh we got married you know we
talked about raising a family and um so
unfortunately my wife had cancer and uh
she had cervical cancer which uh was
caught at an early stage and um and so
she was treated and and she's now 24
years um cancer-free which is which is
wonderful right I mean the the today in
in in British Columbia I have doctors
telling me that it was fortunate
happened back back then because that may
not have been the same outcome today
yeah that's for sure so that's the
healthcare stuff and we can get into
that yes we definitely you know and so
my wife knew I wanted to have children
so yeah she actually said to me um uh at
the time uh shortly after in recovery
she said you know I release you from our
marriage because I know you would like
to have children and I told her I said
no we were married for better for worse
for sickness and health for rich or for
poor so we're we're building this life
together and so we've been Partners in
everything that we have done uh through
our life uh whether it's was going into
business and these kinds of these kinds
of approaches and so when it came to
politics um she she could see that uh
there was an opportunity but more
importantly she could see that there was
a need in our society which is why she
was so she pushed me so hard she'd been
pushing me for years to go into
leadership and I never wanted to because
it wasn't a burning desire but there's a
job that needs to be done and you know
I'm willing to step up and and do that
job and so that's so she she like I say
she was the one who really pushed me to
actually come in and do what I'm doing
today so so let's talk about your
experiences in politics so you you
weren't this wasn't a burning desire but
you became an MLA a member of the
legislative assembly a representative of
your constituency what did you what did
you learn as an
MLA that you hadn't learned as a
business person how how did that expand
your conception of the world you know
it's it's interesting that the most
stress I've ever felt and believe me
I've I've talked to crowds of tens of
thousands right and you public speaking
as you know can be a terrifying
experience for many people the most
stress I've ever felt actually was when
I hired my first um uh person out of
Ontario because that person now I've
uprooted them from their life they're
just out of school they're coming over
and they're very Reliant now on me
providing them with work and providing
them with their future and I took that
experience from the work side and a lot
about that from politics and and so the
most rewarding thing in politics is the
same thing being able to find ways to be
able to support people and people so for
example you know a grandmother that's
trying to adopt their grandchild helping
them through the system to be able to do
that or you know two elderly parents
that need to get a wheelchair for their
42-year-old um daughter and needing you
know help to help to get through these
systems all those sort of things it's
there's a certain amount of reward that
comes with doing that and so when I was
the minister for arinal relations
reconciliation uh with all the
agreements I I signed uh there was one
time where one of the Chiefs who sign
agreement was in tears and I and I I
thought oh my gosh no like what have we
done this isn't good and he said no no
you don't understand five children five
kids had attempted suicide the previous
week and tragically one had died and
this was an agreement that could make a
difference that could actually give
those children hope give them an
opportunity to be able to build a future
there's a certain am certain thing
that's very rewarding in terms of being
able to do those types of things for
society and so to me that's that's what
really drives what I'm doing is because
in politics it's unlike anything else
there's nothing else no other experient
like it where you can actually make
decisions that can improve people's
quality of lives that can help people to
be able to become whoever it is that
they're going to be and so there's a
real appeal to that for me personally
and it's it's very
gratifying Republicans are Nazis you
cannot separate yourselves from the bad
white people growing up I never thought
much about race never really seemed to
matter that much at least not to me am I
racist I would really appreciate it if
I'm trying to learn I'm on this journey
if I'm going to sort this out I need to
go deeper
undercover racist joining us now is Matt
certified Dei expert here's my
certification what you're doing is
you're stretching out of your whiteness
this is more for you in this is America
inherently racist the word inherent is
challenging there want to rename the
George Washington Monument to the George
Floyd Monument America is racist to its
bones so inherently yeah this country is
a
piece white folks white supremacy white
woman white boy is there a black person
around black person right here does he
not
exist hi Robin hi what's your name I'm
Matt just had to ask who you are because
you have to be careful never be too
careful they going to say you RAC buy
your tickets now in theater September
13th rated
PG-13 yeah well you know H I talked to
this Navy X Navy SEAL I think he was an
next I think it was a Navy SEAL it's one
of the American Special Forces Joo
willing Joo is quite the bloody monster
he's about 3et thick and he's he makes
Joe Joe Joe Rogan isn't very tall but
he's tough and and built and you know
Joo makes Joe look like a he's a
really tough guy and he said that you
know when he was a kid he could have
been a pretty bad guy he wanted to be a
soldier from the time he was three and
he's just wired that way physically and
mentally and then he went off to
military training and he started
mentoring other people and he said that
was so much more rewarding than anything
else he ever did that nothing compared
and it's very interesting interesting
you know because it's so easy and this
has to do with narcissism as well it's
so easy for people to feel that you know
if they had resources at their disposal
that they could do anything they want
and and and and be let's say more
sexually attractive and to to have the
advantages that they assume would go
along with unlimited power and resources
and the pathological part of that is
that there isn't anything that is more
meaningful in the Deep sense than being
of service to other people people and
like that's a deep paternal Instinct and
it's a mark of paternal maturity that
you find gratification in that right
it's it's a sacrificial gratification it
is the basis for a competent Society you
know the the lefties in particular the
postmodern types who insist that
everything is about power they just
reveal their own narcissistic hand as
far as I'm concerned in not philosophy
because everything isn't about power if
you think everything's about power you
haven't got anywhere near the core of
what makes
it valuable to be a human being because
you find all of that value in service to
other people well this is something I
see more you know time and time again
with the people on the left um their
ideology is more important than anything
else and so they will often sometimes be
violent um they will take away rights of
other people because they believe that
the ends is Justified and so it it's
it's a it's you know when you look at
what the negative impact will be uh for
what they're actually doing because but
they think it's for this greater good
and it it's an ideology that I struggle
with quite frankly I just something that
just doesn't come to me naturally yeah
well and it would be all right as far as
I was concerned if it was actually for
the greater good if that was actually at
the bottom of it but I don't think it is
I think that the easy moralizing that's
part and parcel of the utopian strain of
central planning thinking it has very
little to do with even the end what it
has to do with is the possibility that
you can be identified in the moment with
someone promoting a positive end as
someone promoting a positive end and
also with no sacrificial requirement on
your part if other people have to pay
for your Utopia you don't have any skin
in the game yes and so we have these
false Solutions see this is the this
goes back to the environmental issue
it's like the left the worldwide green
left is willing to sacrifice the poor of
the present for their hypoth pathetical
poor of the future and that's that's
that's that borders on that borders on
evil or crosses the line as far as I'm
concerned you know and and I often think
about it just From perspective of you
people ask me why why am I doing this
and I I explain this you know in terms
of what I'm doing but really it's it's
you know I'm I'm planting my flag on
Hill I'm saying this is it this is the
fight that is worth fighting this is the
battle that is worth taking on because
it's the society I want to live in right
I don't want to live in that society
that you've just described and that
they're trying to build I don't want to
live in that because in my my opinion if
that's what it's going to be I'm going
to look at going elsewhere yeah I mean
why would I why would I live there right
it does it's not an enjoyable experience
it's not something that is fulfilling
why would you want to live in that kind
of misery and so to me this is the fight
that is worth that is worth taking on
okay so let's delve into the
nitty-gritty this is another reason I
wanted to talk to you too because I'm
I'm always interested in talking to
politicians who have done something
that's of that's what um difficult to
believe the first politician I spoke
with publicly this is way before things
blew up around me was Preston Manning
and I was interested in it was also the
first time I ran into Council culture it
was so interesting because ID run this
little salon at the University of
Toronto that was composed of graduate
students and professors and these were
all friends of mine and colleagues and
very very smart people it was really fun
we met about every week and uh I'd
invite people in and we'd have a
discussion and The Graduate students
would join in it was great fun and then
Preston Manning reached out to me
because his nephew I think no his son
was in my class and liked it and
suggested to his father that he make
contact with me so that happened and so
I invited him to come to this salon and
not to discuss political issues I wanted
to ask him how in the world he managed
to create a political party from scratch
cuz that's really hard you know like
what did you do to bring people together
so rapidly because he rose from nowhere
to become leader of the opposition and
then eventually joined rejoined forces
with the conservative party with the and
but but it's a remarkable story it
happens now in the then in the west
you're kind of doing it again in BC so I
wanted him to come and just say how he
did it you know and a bunch of my
professor friends wouldn't come this was
like in 2014 2013 I thought what do you
mean you won't come it's like he was
leader of the opposition cuz they
thought he was far right you know which
was absolutely Preposterous but in any
case I actually didn't care about his
politics at that point it was like well
you build a political party how' you do
that that's hard and there it's
psychologically interesting anyways
three or four of my friends didn't show
up which well like I said that was the
first time I ran into Council culture
now you didn't start a political party
from scratch but you did more or less
like you took something that had a
history and Preston had done in some way
the same thing how exactly have you
managed to bring the conservatives from
essential obscurity up into the position
where they're an actual Contender for
the throne in the next election the
elections win October October 19th
October 19th okay so so we're get we're
cutting close to the wire here so what
did you do what's the nitty-gritty of
what you did and why do you think it was
effective you know and it's there's no
substitute for the the formula of doing
this it's just hard work
and so the first time you go out and you
talk to people you have seven or 10 or
12 people that will come out then they
like what they hear and so they invite
friends next time you come back you've
got 30 or 40 people next time you come
back you've got 70 or 80 people and it's
if You' hit it right if you've hit it
right if you're if you're hitting the
tones that they want to hear and if you
what you're talking about is reflective
in what they're looking for and I also
you know I'm a firm believer that
politics is not so much about policy
although policy obviously is it drives
everything that that that results from
politics but if I talk to people and
give a speech more often than not most
people won't remember much of what I've
said yeah they might latch on to a few
little ideas or things that they've
touched into but what they get from it
is is a feeling yeah it's whether it is
you know you're authentic or whether it
is they're happy or whether it's or
angry or whatever that may be and that
often drives people far more than you
know they're trying to figure out if
they can trust you or get something from
you let's say those be the options it's
whether it's whether or not you know you
align whether or not they're comfortable
and you know no one will ever be 100%
align with everybody but that has being
a big piece of what we've been doing and
so right from day one of doing this I
hit the road I just went out and lived
out of a suitcase and went traveling
everywhere around the province
connecting with people talking to
business people talking to the average
everyday person and just know slowly
building up these these groups support
and uh and it's just it's been this
multiplier effect that's just been
growing what it's tapped into really is
that desire for change because there's P
people that are so upset with what is
going on in society I mean when you've
got these tent cities and these drug
dens and all these things happening all
over the place and crime is rampant and
criminals are just getting a slap on the
wrist and put it back out on the street
um you know and and they don't like
what's going on the education system and
and the economy you know is sputtering
and they inflation all people are just
looking at thinking this is nuts we need
change and so you know we're tapping
into that desire for change many ways um
that is in a way that people can look at
and say yes that is the direction that
we would like to go in okay so we talked
earlier with regards to the liberal
party because you said you have to hit
the right tones let's say okay but when
we talked earlier about the Liberal
Party one of the things you pointed out
was that and and your unhappiness with
the fact that the liberal party in your
estimation was using the climate issue
as a means of garnering votes and that
that was inappropriate so what's the
difference in your estimation between
attending to the people that you're
speaking with and providing them with a
message that they need and want to hear
and playing a false populist game like
how do you personally how do you balance
the necessity of having principles in
your discussions in your speeches and
and pandering to the crowd and and do
you think you've walked that line
successfully how do you distinguish
those things so what it has to come down
to is just the principles of what you're
trying to do and so when you're when
you're talking to the crowd you always
have to talk from the perspective of you
know what's in your heart what is what
is the belief what are the things that
you are are are standing for what is it
that you've planted your flag on and
saying this is who we are this is what
we're going to do and there's many
people initially that were very
skeptical that you know weren't
supportive but as you start talking
through the issues and and showing the
approach that you can take more and more
people open up to the idea and to and to
what you're trying to do so that's I
haven't had to compromise any of the
sort of values or principles that I've
been trying to uh promote right from the
beginning we've carried forward with
those same principles all the way
through and I think that's the only way
that people can judge you as to whether
you're authentic or not is you know are
you flip-flopping around on issues do
you change you know are you putting
putting your finger up in the air and
trying to figure out where to go or are
you standing on your values and plowing
forward so one of the strangest things
we we've seen in recent years and there
are plenty of them is this emergent
confusion about just what constitutes a
woman and a man and we saw that played
out pretty dramatically at the Olympics
and that's not over yet because the
boxer who won is going to sue Elon Musk
and JK Rowling essentially for
defamation and hate speech I know that
your party has been involved in
clarifying the distinction between men
men and women with regards to say
participation in sports and also for the
protection of women's private spaces you
have a little B there made of moid I
believe that's emblematic of that you
want to explain that a little bit sure
so um this this fall yeah this sry this
past spring uh we introduced a piece of
legislation the first in Canada that
actually was called the fairness for
women and girls in sports and what it's
designed to do is say that biological
men cannot compete against women and
girls in sports in British Columbia and
the intent to that is not to exclude
anybody but not to take the rights of
one people to give to the rights with
other people and I think quite Frank
it's important that the rights of
everybody should be able to be protected
and particularly for you know women and
girls if they want to you know for
example go after scholarships or
whatever it is and they want to be able
to compete at high levels you know they
should be able to compete fairly and the
reason for actually bringing that in is
because of uh I so in my writing First
Nation started up a program called The
Moose hiide campaign and it actually
started from the Fel Paul Asser his his
daughters now taken on Raven and and
they've expanded it gone right across
the country and we were actually as his
Minister we actually gave them some seed
money to get this program up and running
and be able to expand but what it is is
about men talking to men about honoring
and protecting women and girls and
trying to end the violence against women
and girls and so you know I I wear this
frequently in uh in reflection of that
but it's also you know part of the
inspiration to be able to to move
forward and act like we were like we did
last spring and the interesting part was
the left wouldn't even allow it on the
floor they voted against it they
wouldn't even let it pass first reading
and first reading is usually just a
formality before and then it gets called
for further debate they wouldn't even
let it pass first reading they voted
against it so lra sair tweeted out
yesterday some data in the US that
seemed to indicate that about somewhere
around 8,000 minor girls in the last
five years have used insurance money to
obtain double mastectomies with the
gender affirming on the gender affirming
front which I have tweeted out and made
a fair a noise about this is I think
that that is I think it's the worst form
of Quasi criminal behavior that I've
seen among the professional Community
since the horrors of World War II and I
know that Danielle Smith brought in
legislation pretty early to address the
issue
of surgical transformation sterilization
and so forth of minors in Alberta and
took a fair bit of flak for that um any
comments about that domain it's related
to what you just described so so my
perspective is um you know we need to
make sure that we're supporting people
whoever they are and make sure that we
had that support in place particularly
through education you know through the
very challenging formative years in
terms of having that support for them
having that support that even can extend
to families but as a province um I do
not believe it is the right thing to do
to uh support any kind of procedure that
would sterilize a child they are not old
enough to make those kind of decisions
uh who knows where they'll want to be in
their future and I just think as a as a
province we need to do everything we can
to be able to protect children and
children defined as what up to what age
have you well that's that's that's a
good question I mean it's at least 15 16
but it it could very easily be
considered 18 but regardless of that I
just don't believe that as a province
that we should be doing that like I say
children I mean having children is is
precious taking that away from children
before they have their formative years
and and are able to understand who they
are and what they want to be in life uh
I just think it's just the wrong thing
to do okay okay all right well we'll
leave that issue at that I think for now
you said that when you first hit the
road your initial crowds weren't crowds
at all they were very small groups of
people and then it was essentially Word
of Mouth which is a much more powerful
force than people think that started the
crowds to expand so I'm curious why
weren't you what was it in your attitude
and approach that allowed you not to be
demoralized when you were first going
out and speaking to very small groups of
people you know why did you conclude
that this was worth pursuing despite the
fact that you know you were starting
from a 3% Baseline like were you curious
or did you believe that much in your
principles or what what is it that made
you think that that was worth pursuing
so as as I had mentioned before right I
looked at this from perspective of we
need change um and I didn't want to just
you know live with it and so for me this
was a matter of going out and and
presenting an option and I was fully
prepared to go through if it didn't
connect it didn't connect with people
I was okay with that it's not I'm not on
some why were you okay with that because
it's not about narcissism it's not about
you know any sort of anything for me
personally this is just it it's to me
it's the right thing to do we need to
get Society going into a different
direction so I was perfectly prepared
and I still am prepared right to go
forward these are the things I stand for
this is what I what I'm trying to do in
British Columbia and try to convince
people to support us because it's the
right thing to do right and if that
doesn't work you can go back to your
other life and if it doesn't work you
know well then you know I can sleep well
at night I can know that I stood for for
the values and principles that I feel
were important and that I think I want
to be able to see reflected in our
society okay so you you mentioned when
when we first met when we met today you
also said that you're not using
pre-prepared speeches so what do you do
what do you do when you speak then and
how do you decide what you're going to
talk about often I read the crowd okay
but it's but many times there are there
said things that I want to talk about
the values and things that we want to do
whether it's changing the education
system whether it is you know ending
decriminalization and and safe Supply
that kind of thing whether it's getting
our economy going the significant change
that's needed in our health care System
our Health Care system is absolutely
crazy we need to be looking at those
European models for example that are
universal healthcare but delivered by
both government and non-government
agencies right so there's all these
changes so I'll talk about those I'll
talk about what the problems are and
I'll talk about what I think the
solutions can be and terms of what we do
as a society and so and it depends on
you know which crowd I'm in whether it's
you know up in the north or in the teror
or whether it's down in the Lower
Mainland or on the island is to I
doesn't I don't change what I'm saying I
change the topics that I may be talking
about and focusing on just because you
know I know I I believe those topics are
more relevant for a crowd say in
Victoria than it is for a crowd in in
say Fort St John yeah well it's been
remarkable to watch what's happened to
the healthc care system in the last
particular ularly in the last 5 years I
think my wife we live in Ontario I think
my wife has been without a physician for
four years and my physician is moving
and I have no idea how I'm going to
replace him fundamentally I mean I have
options obviously but and options that
most people don't have but it's it's
very it's very very interesting to me to
watch what's happening to the Health
Care system because it's been a it's
been a real Pride point for Canadians
and even more specifically for the left
the success of Canada's socialized
Medicare Medicare system and it's not an
easy problem to solve partly
because even the concept of Health Care
in some ways is ridiculous it's much too
comprehensive to be considered as
something that's a unit but we have free
health care in Canada it's not free
because we pay taxes but it's also not
free in a very another very fundamental
way which is that dying waiting is not
free wondering you know having for
example when my daughter needed an ankle
replacement when she was 16 the waiting
list was three years and she was walking
essentially walking around at that point
on two broken legs it's like three years
say that that's not three years that's
death because there's no way you walk
around on two broken legs for three
years and make it through that that
doesn't happen to people and so the
waiting list approached to cost is not
effective and so in Canada now we're in
a situation where you can't get the care
you need often you can't even get on a
waiting list to to see a specialist that
would provide that care and you can't
have private insurance to cover you and
you can't pay for it so the rationing
system in Canada for healthcare is you
get to die waiting right that's not free
well in British Columbia uh we don't
actually collect these stats because
government likes to operate in secret uh
which is a whole different topic but um
looking at the national stats we have
the number of people dying in British
Columbia today on a daily basis waiting
for diagnostic services or surgery is
comparable to the number of people who
are dying from the opioid crisis and
nobody's talking about it Y and it's
crazy like this is I find that
completely unaccept say that again the
number of people who are dying wait on a
waiting list for diagnostic services and
surgery in British Columbia is
comparable to the number of people who
are dying uh of Overdose deaths in
British Columbia because of the opioid
crisis right right well it seems to me
that in Canada right now and I truly
believe this that there are so many
things
happening that at a level that's
actually scandalous that no one can keep
up I've really watched this with Trudeau
because it's something remarkable for me
to see like about every two weeks the
Trudeau government has a scandal of
sufficient magnitude under normal
circumstances to collapse a competent
government and yet nothing happens and
then the next Scandal comes along it's
because people have lost faith in
reporting because there's so much
information out there so actually I
actually one of the things I want to do
is change politics forever in psh
Columbia and what I want to do is we
have what's called Freedom of
Information requests right you have all
this information which is public
information and if you want it you have
to pay a certain amount of money and you
can you can apply to access it and you
know months later you might get some
redacted document right that that you
get uh I'm going to change that I'm
going to get rid of freedom information
request because I'm going to make all of
the information that can be made Public
public like they of the freedom
information officer should be to say
what can't be made public right give the
people the facts give them the
information and then it's no longer
politicians that are giving spin but
politicians that are responding to the
facts and you can judge political
parties based on facts as opposed to
based on whatever spin they're giving
try to build some confidence and and a
little bit you know restore some of that
confidence back in government and
government institutions that's being
lost and continually eroded particularly
because of what's going on with the with
the politics of the left okay do you
think that you have garnered sufficient
management and administrative experience
to run a
province from from the combination of
your work as a private entrepreneur an
MLA you were a cabinet minister for a
while so how do you feel about your
competence as an administrative leader
but then also equally importantly what
makes you convinced that among the ranks
of the conservative party you have
enough talent to formulate a cabinet
that will be made of people who are
competent enough to do the job properly
I know for example when the Democrats
took power in Washington I know this for
a fact that they knew amongst themselves
that they didn't have anywhere near
enough competent people to fill the
positions that needed to be filled hence
the situation in part of the problem
with the situation in the US but it is a
big problem it's like you're you're
you're running a huge Enterprise it's
certainly equivalent to a major
corporation like a major International
corporation5 billion 89 billion right
right right so so why you what do you
bring to the table as a not only as a
leader who can speak directly to people
but more importantly as an administrator
and a manager and and how do you know
that you have people around you that can
actually do this job
credibly well I mean I'm perfectly
willing to admit that um you know I'm
probably going to make a few mistakes I
mean that's just no one's perfect
however what I do know is I know how
government works I know the process of
of how government works um you know I'm
more than capable from my perspective of
being able to to manage and govern and
direct uh both the people involved as
well as the uh bureaucracy which is a
huge part of the change that is going to
be needed uh in terms of getting things
done we've got a very good group of
people that are running for us with a an
enormous variety of skill sets
everything from lawyers and doctors to
uh you know prominent business people
very successful business people
entrepreneurs to Farmers um you know to
local politicians and I also have a
handful of people who have been in
government before not in not in cabinet
uh but one other person has being
cabinet but have been you know as mlas
and so I've got a good mix of people to
be able to draw from that I think have
the experience that we need to be able
to move forward the agenda on top of
that of course one of the big pieces is
is the transition right you're coming
into this and the NDP have had seven
years to put all of their people in
place and all their ideology driv
infiltrated throughout throughout the
system so we need to come in and I've
got a a transition team that uh we've
already been building and working on to
come in and help us with uh making some
changes that are needed so that we have
that suppor of layers within the
bureaucracy to be able to uh push
forward our agenda as well and so it I
mean it's going to be a lot of change
believe me there's a lot of work that
needs to be done and over a very short
period of time but I've said to my
colleagues that are running for me I've
said look be prepared for a lot of work
you're going to be putting in long hours
there is a lot to do in a short period
of time and uh you know I'm going to be
I guess you could say quite a Taskmaster
make sure that it gets done yeah well it
it you have that combination of
entrepreneurial business and political
experience that's relatively rare to
have all three of those so that's well
that's something you definitely have
under your belt let's talk about educ
for a minute so I want to put forward um
a couple of propositions and tell you
tell me what you think about them so
I've been speaking with Republican
Governors and the Republicans I know in
the US and that's quite a few of them as
well as conservatives in Canada about
the K through2 education system as well
as the higher education system but let's
start with k through2 so I want to run
another proposition by you so I worked
in the universities for a long time and
I saw how they worked and I worked at
Harvard which was an unbelievable
unbelievably functional institution in
the 1990s I'd never been anywhere like
it Mill was good I went to school as a
graduate student at Migel and I had a
very good educational experience there
and Miguel did a lot of things right but
Harvard was really knocking it out of
the park when I was there in the 90s um
the senior faculty were the smartest
people I'd ever met and the most
educated the uh undergraduates were
unbelievably high quality like a third
of them were the smartest kids you'd
ever seen and the other two-thirds were
they were content ERS you know and so
and uh the place really served
excellence and so and then you could see
the edges of the politically correct
movement manifesting itself around the
fringes in the 1990s but they really
didn't have any real power the last time
I was down in Boston was about a month
ago I met some of my former colleagues
great people really and uh they've all
joined the Free Speech movement at
Harvard and they set theel at odds with
the administration which is an appalling
thing to see you know and that's Harvard
and then I was at the University of
Toronto for a long time and it made a
lot of noise about Excellence but really
had no fund no real fundamental clue
about what it meant or how to pursue it
and and uh but I had a very good time
there and and I liked it a lot but I
learned a lot about what was wrong with
higher education
and emblematic of what's wrong with
higher education is the faculties of
Education okay they're full of
educational psychologists and that's a
corrupt discipline and almost everything
that it's produced is a lie whole word
learning that's a lie that anti phonics
movement the self-esteem movement that's
a complete bloody lie and all it did was
produce a pack of narcissists um
multiple intelligences that's complete
bloody lie like the educational
psychologists have been a negative
influence consistently for 60 years and
the the faculties of Education have
arguably the worst students in the
university and arguably the worst
faculty now why is that a problem well
they're radical and incompetent that's a
big problem in the United States they
control 50% of the state budgets 50%
okay and the faculties of Education are
why the conservatives lost the culture
War and the conservatives have been too
blind for four generations to see this
and there's a Nexus
point the faculties of Education have a
hammer lock on teacher certification and
I don't understand that they there's no
evidence whatsoever that their training
regimens produce qualified teachers none
we all even know what makes a teacher
effective conscientiousness is the trait
High cognitive ability and
conscientiousness you can select them
why what's your view of what's corrupted
the K through2 education system and what
do you think might be done about it
because like I think that the faculties
of Education should have the right to
certify teachers stripped from them it
would kill them and they deserve it and
I think the reason
the classic liberals and the
conservatives have lost the culture wars
because the faculties of Education of
how to hammerlock on teacher
certification so I know that's a
mouthful and it's a radical analysis and
a radical proposition but I'm wondering
what you think of what's going on in the
K through2 system sorry I'm smiling
because uh when I think about the
education system the big first thing
comes to mind is our education system in
British Columbia today is teaching kids
what to think it's not teaching kids how
to think it's not teaching kids how to
be critical thinkers and that is to me
is the fundamental problem within the
system itself and so there's material
that is within our education system
which is designed for more um of uh an
indoctrination as opposed to actually
providing kids with the skills they need
kids are coming out of school and
University professors College
Specialists are telling me they're not
prepared for anything postsecondary they
can't read and they don't know anything
some people can't even write their own
name and so I look at the system I think
okay what is needed to start with is we
need to do a full review of all the
material that's being made available for
teachers so and look at it from a
perspective of being neutral who would
review it you you know how you go you
got to put a team together that's going
to review it and so it's going to be
some Educators it's going to be some
people that are not Educators who are
going to go through and look at the
material from that critical lens and so
you know for example there's I think a
book in grade four math I think it's
called math that matters and the math is
correct 2 plus 2 equal 4 but the
language being used is all about
environmentalism it's all social justice
oriented exactly it's all about you know
anti-development and that whole side of
things so we wonder when the kids go to
school why why got this bent and because
this is what they've been taught this
what they've been Indo from day one for
12 years so we're going to try to change
all of that right in terms of that
material make sure it's all neutral in
terms of how the information is being
provided and quite frankly we need to
bring in something you know that I think
is critical fiscal management you know
teaching kids about how money actually
works compound interest and you know
debt and all those sort of things so
those those will be some big shifts that
we need to do and the fight okay so let
me let me ask you a question about that
so why neutral exactly like why not
unabashedly anti-communist unabashedly
pro- free Market unabashedly Western
tradition of Freedom you know because I
think and I'm I'm it seems to me that
one of the errors that conservatives and
classic liberals have made consistent ly
across time is a kind of apologetic
neutrality so I'll give you one example
so at the University of Toronto in my
personality course so it's a psychology
course seconde psychology course I used
to teach the kids about what happened in
stalinist Russia and I did that because
I used Alexander Sol niten as an example
of existential psychology because he was
an existential psychologist like Victor
Frankl now one of the shocking things to
me was that n none of my students had
ever heard about what had happened in
Russia between 1920 and
1989 let's say um even though we fought
we just about torched the planet and we
fought a cold war over it they had no
idea what the stalinists had done and so
that's a good example of something that
where even neutrality isn't sufficient
it's like the Communists were brutal
genocidal murderers wherever they've set
up shop it's happening again in
Venezuela it's still happening in Cuba
it threatens all of South America China
is a complete bloody catastrophe on the
on the ideological front and they're
permeating the world it's a catastrophe
and our education system tells students
nothing about that and you know
conservatives are this is this
particularly true in Canada although
it's starting to shift is that they're
so terrified of being demolished by the
woke mob and also of being accused of
something approximating social
conservatism is that they do take refuge
in something like neutrality but I'm not
sure it's time for neutrality it depends
what you mean by neutrality so in terms
of it and by the way regarding the
cancel culture cancel culture only works
if you allow them to cancel you yes you
just have to stand up and say you know
take a hike and and it goes away right
because when if they can't cancel you
then they have to find some something
else to do so but with Garden school
what I mean by neutrality is not that we
won't teach about communism that we
won't teach about the holocost because
we will we need to show that from a
perspective of this is the facts that
happened this is the evil that happened
this is this is the damage that was done
with it not just from an ideological
perspective but from a fact based and
that's what I mean by neutral I don't
mean neutral as we won't talk about
communism we won't talk about you know
fascism we won't talk about you know
democracy or capitalism whatever case
may be we will but in terms of providing
facts and information so that people the
kids can look at this and come to their
own conclusions and because you're going
to have people still on the left and the
right and families are still going to
have lots of influence and I think
that's okay that's a rounded Society
I think it gets it where Society runs
into trouble is it gets too far on any
one particular side you know the
pendulum swinging back and forth and so
you want to try to keep that as much as
you can into a place where it creates
positive uh opportunities and and people
who are informed and critical thinkers
and are able to look at information that
comes forward with a critical eye and
ask the questions based on facts that
they have that you know Dee from our
history and so that's what I'm hoping
our education system will become so
have mixed feelings about this because
for a conservative to stand up and say
all the institutions that we relied on
the west are corrupt in some ways plays
directly into the hands of the leftist
radicals who say all the institutions in
the west are irreparably corrupt right
and and it this is a real problem it's a
real problem and then I look at the K
through2 education system and I think
well we could look at what happened at
Twitter when musk took it over he fired
like 85% of the people no decrement in
Twitter performance in fact quite the
cont
but he had to do that in order
to dispense with the ideological
corruption because it was that deep it's
like it strikes me as highly probable
that that's the case with the education
system and it because it's been four
generations of this so you know in in
British com I was a school trustee for
three years right and uh there was one
of one of the schools I looked after
there was two grade four classes um you
know all the kids going into one class
were out or about a Grade Three reading
level and left out or about a grade four
reading level all the kids going into
the other class were at or about a Grade
Three reading level and left at or about
a Grade Three reading right right and so
I looked at and went wait a second this
teacher is obviously there's something
going on here if this is happening year
after year after year there's obviously
you know performance problem performance
problem well in the education system
British Columbia you can't remove
somebody for pad performance it's not
possible I I think there's only one
person since 1986 and in a system that's
got 42,000 teachers I mean as you know
there's going to be a certain percentage
just by statistics that are going to
65% of managers add negative net value
to their companies exactly once why the
old rule 20% getting work done right
right exactly in terms of it so you look
at this and you think okay um this is
this is a real problem but because the
the union has such a lock on this it it
is extremely difficult to change that so
there are some shifts that I am looking
at and considering uh in terms of the
education system but I need to start
with the basics first and then see how
that can improve and then look at what
the next level needs to be in terms of
making those shifts and I and the reason
why I'm saying that is um there's only
so much change people will accept
absolutely as you know right most people
won't accept any change except when you
get these these moments in time like I
think we have in British Columbia where
people are expecting and wanting change
right you have a window so you've got a
window to be able to do a number of
things right and build and so there's a
lot of change that's needed and so how
far you push on some of those things
before you prevent yourself from
actually being able to get changes that
you need in other areas well you're
you're going to be in the same position
as POV I think because whatever you
think the state of the British economy
is it or the British Colombian economy
it's worse yeah and so that's going to
be dumped on you the moment you take
office assuming that you win and the
same thing's going to happen to PV so
you're going to have the problem of
having to make radical changes while
simultaneously having to bear the burden
of every bad decision that's been made
in the last who knows how long at least
seven years so yeah that's a very tough
that's a very tough road and so and the
number one thing we need to do right I
mean there's all these changes we need
on the social side and structure within
government all that kind of stuff but
the number one thing we need to do
actually need to get our economy going I
mean they've driven the economy into the
ground and so we're going to basically
have a bit of a slogan which is just to
get stuff done I might use a different
word the yes word but we just have to do
this right we have to get the permits
out the door we have to you know change
that structure in place so that we can
actually start driving the economy and
creating the environment where people
want to stay in British Columbia and to
give them hope for that they can build
their future so that's going to be a big
Focus while we are doing the structural
changes on all the social side like in
health and education the stuff we need
to change on the criminal codes and the
stuff we need to change you know in the
drugs and and that whole side of things
so there a there's a lot that's going to
be going on all at the same time but as
a priority you've got to think okay we
got to able to pay for this we running
an $8 billion deficit the largest
deficit in BC's history you're running a
10% deficit just about um and you want
to be able to give tax relief you got to
get rid of things like the carbon tax is
another $ three and a half billion
dollars that you that are taken out of
people's pockets so you got to do that
structural change but at the same time
you need the money to do it so you have
to be able to get the environment where
people will want to invest in British
Columbia again and create those jobs and
drive you know quite frankly wage growth
which is another big factor that needs
to be done to deal with affordability
okay so well so I wanted to close with a
disc discuss of priorities because I
thought it would be useful for you to
tell your voters you know what your
priorities are in the near future if you
become Premier and you just alluded to
that so let's let's close by delving
into priorities so you said that your
first priority is going to be to get the
economy moving and so what relatively
short-term measures do you think that
you could take that would give you that
80% return for 20% investment like what
are the egregious errors that are being
committed right now that you could in
principle reverse rapidly that would
signal to people that if those who can
will now be allowed and encouraged to do
what what could they look forward to in
the first three or four months so we
have 17 mines that are either permitted
or about to be permitted in British
Columbia that represents a $ 38 billion
investment that'll generate between 20
and 30,000 jobs with an average wage and
benefit of 138,000 a year and will add
500 to 800 billion into British Columbia
GDP over the life of those mines so
we're just going to get those things out
the door and get started obviously
there's going to be work with First
Nations and things that need done that's
going to be a priority to get done there
are three more U natural gas pipelines
permitted to the coast and those permits
will start expiring in November of this
year they've already had fiveyear
extensions they can't apply for another
extension so on day one we are going to
do a pass an order in councel to give a
10-year extension to those permits
because there a linear project they
don't need to go through nothing has
changed we're going to be then changing
the need for using electricity for
compression of of LG of natural gas to
uh using natural gas for compression so
these are just the basic things that
we'll do right at the beginning to start
getting the investment back into British
Columbia then there's some structural
changes on Forester we need to do and
then of course there's there's some
structural changes we need to do just
from the economic side period for
example in British Columbia it takes two
years or longer to get something as
simple as a warehouse built South of the
Border it's three months yeah and so we
need to everybody just moves South so
we're just we got to strip away all that
all that permitting process and go to a
place that's one project one permit
right and and clean up a bunch of these
things so there's all of that stuff is
is designed to set the stage but then
the key is you still have to get people
to invest you still get people that want
to do work in British Columbia and so
you set the stage and then you have to
build the confidence that they can come
in and actually make for the long run
for the long run know that when they're
putting $38 billion into the ground for
various projects U that they have an
reasonable expectation for return within
a reasonable time frate and so and and
the certainty when they go in that you
know the the land's not going to shift
from underneath them okay so if I was an
environmentalist radical listening to
what you just said I'd be rubbing my
hands in anticipation of all the
protests that I could Mount so if you go
ahead with rapid uh um what would you
say restructuring so these projects
could take place you'll be facing a
substantial amount of pretty radical
opposition and so that's a very
difficult thing to deal with right
because people have right except for
except for one thing yeah this is a
Democratic Society at least it should be
and if we're given the mandate to do
this then that's what we will do it's
not like we're not put being upfront and
talking to people and saying this is
what we're going to do this is what
we're going to do and we will have the
people's mandate should we be elected to
actually be able to implement these
things now we're not throwing
environmental standards out the window
of course we're going to meet the
environmental standards we want to make
sure that we are we are good citizens of
our environment and of the land that we
have but we're not going to be jumping
through these enormous hoops and then
barriers that are put in place that have
been intentially put in to sty the
opportunity to actually do and so if
there's going to be people that are
going to protest I get it there's going
to be they're have the right to protest
if they want to fill the lawn of the
legislature that's fine you know what
and and a listen to them if there's
reasonable arguments to be made but if
they're just going to be you know just
protesting because they want everybody
to be naked running under the trees you
know fill your boots I'm not interested
in going down that path but if they want
to come forward with reasonable things
that we need to address okay we'll look
at that but one thing I will not allow
is I'm not going to allow hate and I'm
not going to allow um um you know
violence in in terms of our society like
what we're seeing right now for example
the uh um the anti-Semitism that is
going on in British Columbia in the
protests where people are calling for
the destruction of the Jewish people and
the genocide of Jewish people wait a
second that is Hate by its very
definition that should not be allowed in
our society it should not be it should
it needs to be stopped government needs
to step up and say no that is not
acceptable because if that's allowed
where does that carry on where does that
go I was talking with one family one
Jewish Family she's 67 her her mom uh
you know grew up through um through the
Holocaust and she is making plans to
leave British Columbia and I asked her
why and she said because
yeah where what's happening
today reminds her very much of the
stories her mother told about 1932 in
Germany it's unbelievable I never
thought I'd see this in C that scares me
and so that's a fundamental shift that
we need to do to get back to a society
that is open that is fair that is
treating people uh you know fairly and
safely and that's it's a it's a shift
you know on that side that is
desperately needed okay so I'm going to
summarize our conversation and for
everybody watching and listening I think
I'll continue to talk John rustad about
um the philosophy of conservatism and
small L liberalism in some detail on The
Daily wire side so that's an and to
contrast that with the radical
utopianism of let's say the progressive
neo-marxist left i' I'd like to go more
into the philosophy of of government and
governance so we'll do that on the daily
wire side to summarize essentially well
British Columbia is a province where the
war between the utopian socialists and
the free market um classic English
liberals really is particularly Market
intense and the utopian socialist green
types anti-human green types I think
have had the upper hand for a good long
time in British Columbia and there's
been a fair amount of very little
environmental progress and a fair amount
of economic Havoc wreak as a consequence
and so you want to take um the Reigns
let's say and return the province to
something approximating a free market
orientation your primary considerations
upon taking govern taking the Reigns of
the Govern will be economic you want to
get rid of the obstacles in the way of
allowing the people of British Columbia
to have a high quality economic future
you talked about mines you talked about
forestry you talked about fossil fuels
it's lwh hanging fruit in a sense if you
can clear away the red tape and keep the
protesters at Bay at least stop them
from stopping everything and so that's
your short-term plan on the longer term
you're looking at education reform
Health Care reform um maybe some
additional fortification of property
rights um and you think that you can get
the economic ball rolling in relatively
short order you think that you're the
man for the job at least in part
because you made a decision to run on
principle even though you don't exactly
need the job you have private Enterprise
experience as an entrepreneur and as a
manager you're in MLA for a good period
of time and you're in the cabinet and
you think that you have enough people
around you so that you could do a a
competent job is there anything that I
missed as a summary that's a that's a
pretty good summary uh from my
perspective and uh I always like to say
you know what I what we stand for is
just to stand for what's right and fight
for the average everyday person you know
when you look at the at the class
differences you know the left has really
become a party of Elites um and
environmentalists and the average person
has being left out of that equation
entirely and so that's got to be a focus
of us as a government so funny you and I
you know we about the same age and when
when we were younger it was pretty
obvious that the NDP was a workingclass
party run in large by labor union
leaders the conservatives were the party
of big business and the Liberals were
sort of in the middle and everyone knew
that and everybody played that game in a
pretty straight way I would say it's
pretty damn weird that Pierre BV is
attracting all the people in work boots
now and that the conservatives have
become the party of the working class
you know and in British Columbia we are
getting large number of people from the
NDP actually coming over and joining us
and being part of our party I've got a
former NDP MLA running for us the former
leader of the green party has come out
and endorsed policies and approaches
that we're doing because they just make
sense as opposed to much of this
ideology that quite frankly is going too
far so um we put together a very
interesting Coalition in British
Columbia and we call it conservatism and
we call it the conservative party but
really like I say it's it's more of that
just standing for what's right instead
of you know on ideologies right right
all right sir well good luck on the
October 19th election I'll be watching
that with great interest and and uh not
a little trepidation because it would
really be an awful thing to have the
ports of British Columbia closed for
Canada to Aid the world with let's say
energy provision that would really be
quite the catastrophe for many people
not just the people in British Columbia
for the Japanese arguably for the
Europeans yeah so I really hope right
across the world you bet right across
the world it is our hope that we can
bring back just a little Common Sense
even though Common Sense isn't very
common but just get back to the basics
yeah um and uh you know open up our
Province and quite frankly help that to
open up the country as well yeah in
terms of what can happen and what should
happen for what I truly believe is the
best country in the world y y all right
thanks sir very much very good talking
to you thank you yeah and thank you to
every everybody watching and listening
uh another what would you say slice of
the ongoing culture War making itself
manifest in what should be and easily
could be Canada's richest Province
British Columbia is a remarkably
beautiful place with an immense amount
of opportunity and possibility and it's
a real catastrophe to watch it
degenerate into this idiot
counterproductive socialist Utopia so to
speak um and put the entire economy of
the country at risk so I'm hoping that
there'll be some change on October 19th
thank you to everybody who's watching
and listening thank you to the film crew
here in Fairview Alberta where we
managed to do this live so that was
quite an unexpected bonus and uh um a
welcome opportunity and thanks again sir
for taking the time to talk with me
thank you very much I've enjoyed our
chat
[Music]